Accounting Standard (AS) 1*
(issued 1979)
Disclosure of Accounting Policies
[This Accounting Standard includes paragraphs set in bold italic type and plain
type, which have equal authority. Paragraphs in bold italic type indicate the
main principles. This Accounting Standard should be read in the context of the
Preface to the Statements of Accounting Standards,1 the ‘Applicability of
Accounting Standards to Various Entities’ (See Appendix 1 to this
Compendium).]
Introduction
1. This Standard deals with the disclosure of significant accounting policies
followed in preparing and presenting financial statements.
2. The view presented in the financial statements of an enterprise of its state
of affairs and of the profit or loss can be significantly affected by the accounting
policies followed in the preparation and presentation of the financial
statements. The accounting policies followed vary from enterprise to enterprise.
Disclosure of significant accounting policies followed is necessary if the view
presented is to be properly appreciated.
3. The disclosure of some of the accounting policies followed in the
preparation and presentation of the financial statements is required by law in
some cases.
4. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India has, in Standard issued by it,
recommended the disclosure of certain accounting policies, e.g., translation
policies in respect of foreign currency items2.
5. In recent years, a few enterprises in India have adopted the practice of
including in their annual reports to shareholders a separate statement of
accounting policies followed in preparing and presenting the financial
statements.
* The Standard was earlier notified as part of Companies (Accounting Standards) Rules,
2006, under Companies Act, 1956. The Standard has been notified as part of Companies
(Accounting Standards) Rules, 2021, under Companies Act, 2013.
1 Attention is specifically drawn to paragraph 4.3 of the Preface, according to which
Accounting Standards are intended to apply only to items which are material.
2 In the Companies (Accounting Standards) Rules, 2021, paragraph 4 is as under:
“Accounting Standards require the disclosure of certain accounting policies, e.g., translation
policies in respect of foreign currency items.”

-- 1 of 6 --

AS 1, Disclosure of Accounting Policies
6. In general, however, accounting policies are not at present regularly and
fully disclosed in all financial statements. Many enterprises include in the Notes
on the Accounts, descriptions of some of the significant accounting policies. But
the nature and degree of disclosure vary considerably between the corporate and
the non-corporate sectors and between units in the same sector.
7. Even among the few enterprises that presently include in their annual
reports a separate statement of accounting policies, considerable variation
exists. The statement of accounting policies forms part of accounts in some
cases while in others it is given as supplementary information.
8. The purpose of this Standard is to promote better understanding of
financial statements by establishing through an accounting standard the
disclosure of significant accounting policies and the manner in which accounting
policies are disclosed in the financial statements. Such disclosure would also
facilitate a more meaningful comparison between financial statements of
different enterprises.
Explanation
Fundamental Accounting Assumptions
9. Certain fundamental accounting assumptions underlie the preparation and
presentation of financial statements. They are usually not specifically stated
because their acceptance and use are assumed. Disclosure is necessary if they
are not followed.
10. The following have been generally accepted as fundamental accounting
assumptions:—
a. Going Concern
The enterprise is normally viewed as a going concern, that is, as continuing in
operation for the foreseeable future. It is assumed that the enterprise has neither
the intention nor the necessity of liquidation or of curtailing materially the scale
of the operations.
b. Consistency
It is assumed that accounting policies are consistent from one period to
another.

-- 2 of 6 --

AS 1, Disclosure of Accounting Policies
c. Accrual
Revenues and costs are accrued, that is, recognised as they are earned or
incurred (and not as money is received or paid) and recorded in the financial
statements of the periods to which they relate. (The considerations affecting the
process of matching costs with revenues under the accrual assumption are not
dealt with in this Standard.)
Nature of Accounting Policies
11. The accounting policies refer to the specific accounting principles and the
methods of applying those principles adopted by the enterprise in the
preparation and presentation of financial statements.
12. There is no single list of accounting policies which are applicable to all
circumstances. The differing circumstances in which enterprises operate in a
situation of diverse and complex economic activity make alternative accounting
principles and methods of applying those principles acceptable. The choice of
the appropriate accounting principles and the methods of applying those
principles in the specific circumstances of each enterprise calls for considerable
judgement by the management of the enterprise.
13. The Accounting Standards of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India combined with the efforts of government and other regulatory agencies
and progressive managements have reduced in recent years the number of
acceptable alternatives. While continuing efforts in this regard in future are likely
to reduce the number still further, the availability of alternative accounting
principles and methods of applying those principles is not likely to be eliminated
altogether in view of the differing circumstances faced by the enterprises3.
3In the Companies (Accounting Standards) Rules, 2021, paragraph 13 is as under: “The
Accounting Standards combined with the efforts of government and other regulatory
agencies and progressive managements have reduced in recent years the number of
acceptable alternatives particularly in case of corporate enterprises. While continuing efforts
in this regard in future are likely to reduce the number still further, the availability of alternative
accounting principles and methods of applying those principles is not likely to be eliminated
altogether in view of the differing circumstances faced by the enterprises”.

-- 3 of 6 --

AS 1, Disclosure of Accounting Policies
Areas in Which Differing Accounting Policies are
Encountered
14. The following are examples of the areas in which different accounting policies
may be adopted by different enterprises:
(a) Methods of depreciation, depletion and amortisation
(b) Treatment of expenditure during construction
(c) Conversion or translation of foreign currency items
(d) Valuation of inventories
(e) Treatment of goodwill
(f) Valuation of investments
(g) Treatment of retirement benefits
(h) Recognition of profit on long-term contracts
(i) Valuation of fixed assets
(j) Treatment of contingent liabilities.
15. The above list of examples is not intended to be exhaustive.
Considerations in the Selection of Accounting Policies
16. The primary consideration in the selection of accounting policies by an
enterprise is that the financial statements prepared and presented on the basis
of such accounting policies should represent a true and fair view of the state of
affairs of the enterprise as at the balance sheet date and of the profit or loss for
the period ended on that date.
17. For this purpose, the major considerations governing the selection and
application of accounting policies are:—
a. Prudence
In view of the uncertainty attached to future events, profits are not anticipated
but recognised only when realised though not necessarily in cash. Provision is
made for all known liabilities and losses even though the amount cannot be
determined with certainty and represents only a best estimate in the light of

-- 4 of 6 --

AS 1, Disclosure of Accounting Policies
available information.
b. Substance over Form
The accounting treatment and presentation in financial statements of
transactions and events should be governed by their substance and not
merely by the legal form.
c. Materiality
Financial statements should disclose all “material” items, i.e. items the
knowledge of which might influence the decisions of the user of the financial
statements.
Disclosure of Accounting Policies
18. To ensure proper understanding of financial statements, it is necessary that
all significant accounting policies adopted in the preparation and
presentation of financial statements should be disclosed.
19. Such disclosure should form part of the financial statements.
20. It would be helpful to the reader of financial statements if they are all
disclosed as such in one place instead of being scattered over several
statements, schedules and notes.
21. Examples of matters in respect of which disclosure of accounting
policies adopted will be required are contained in paragraph 14. This list of
examples is not, however, intended to be exhaustive.
22. Any change in an accounting policy which has a material effect should be
disclosed. The amount by which any item in the financial statements is affected
by such change should also be disclosed to the extent ascertainable. Where
such amount is not ascertainable, wholly or in part, the fact should be indicated.
If a change is made in the accounting policies which has no material effect on
the financial statements for the current period but which is reasonably expected
to have a material effect in later periods, the fact of such change should be
appropriately disclosed in the period in which the change is adopted.
23. Disclosure of accounting policies or of changes therein cannot remedy a
wrong or inappropriate treatment of the item in the accounts.

-- 5 of 6 --

AS 1, Disclosure of Accounting Policies
Main Principles
24. All significant accounting policies adopted in the preparation and
presentation of financial statements should be disclosed.
25. The disclosure of the significant accounting policies as such should
form part of the financial statements and the significant accounting
policies should normally be disclosed in one place.
26. Any change in the accounting policies which has a material effect in
the current period or which is reasonably expected to have a material effect
in later periods should be disclosed. In the case of a change in accounting
policies which has a material effect in the current period, the amount by
which any item in the financial statements is affected by such change
should also be disclosed to the extent ascertainable. Where such amount
is not ascertainable, wholly or in part, the fact should be indicated.
27. If the fundamental accounting assumptions, viz. Going Concern,
Consistency and Accrual are followed in financial statements, specific
disclosure is not required. If a fundamental accounting assumption is not
followed, the fact should be disclosed.

-- 6 of 6 --

